---
layout: post
title: The UTS Benchmark
description: My notes on the unbalanced tree search benchmark.
---
The UTS Benchmark
=================
***
Introduction
--------
This page simply contains my notes about the 
[Unbalanced Tree Search](http://sourceforge.net/p/uts-benchmark/wiki/Home/)
benchmark. It is worth noting I am an undergraduate student at Virginia Tech, 
and I am far from an expert in parallel computing. This is simply a summary 
of my findings for future reference.

So what is the "Unbalanced Tree Search" benchmark? The idea is pretty simple, 
you create a tree where each node has a random number of children and 
exhaustively search that tree. This presents an obvious problem for load 
balancing because you have no idea what the tree will look like when you start 
searching it. This will prevent most static load balancing schemes from 
functioning efficiently.

The implementation of this benchmark provided on sourceforge uses a work 
stealing algorithm that works by idle threads polling other threads seeing if 
there is work they can do (i.e. nodes they can search). This implementation 
provides a good example of how to use the UTS problem for benchmarking. Feel 
free to look at the sourceforge page to see what parallel programming paradigms 
that the UTS benchmark supports. In these notes I am discussing the pthreads 
implementation.

What Is It Good For?
--------------------
According to the whitepaper 
[here](http://sourceforge.net/p/uts-benchmark/wiki/Home/) "By varying key work 
stealing parameters, we expose important tradeoffs between the granularity 
of load balance, the degree of parallelism, and communication costs." In other 
words, the intent of the benchmark is to illustrate the overhead that load 
balancing can introduce on the execution of parallel code.

The UTS problem is specifically useful for profiling dynamic load balancing 
algorithms like work sharing or work stealing. It's hard for me to say that the 
benchmark is good for all dynamic load balancing algorithms, but I think you can 
see that it is useful where it applies.

How Does It Work?
-----------------
The "how it works" for this is divided into the two major components of the 
benchmark. The generation of the tree and the actual load balancing itself.

### Generating the Tree
* Start at root
* Given the probability distribution determine number of children.  

	* Geometric
		* Get b_i (expected value) using tree shape function
		* Get probability p from b_i (1/(1+b_i))
		* Get random probability between 0 and 1 using nodes descriptor
		* Determine how many children that corresponds to using
		inverse geometric cumulative density function 
		(just solve for k pretty much)	
	* Binomial
		* Get random probability between 0 and 1 using parent descriptor
		* If that probability is less than the probability of there not being a leaf then return 0 otherwise return the branching factor
		* This means that if your node has children, it will be a constant number of children
* Generate children using parent descriptor and index of child
	* Take sha-1 hash of parent descriptor and child index
	* set that as the childs descriptor
	* rinse repeat for the appropriate number of children

### Load Balancing
* Two general schemes
	* Work Sharing
	* Work Stealing
* Implementation uses work stealing
	* Each thread has a public steal stack.
	* When a thread runs out of work it looks on other nodes steal stacks to find chunks of nodes to work on
	* If it can't find chunks of the chunksize then it goes to the barrier and waits.
	* Note: The steal stack is different than the stack it is operating on. This prevents the need for the owning thread to synchronize.

Results
-------
I ran the pthreads version of the benchmark on a dual xeon server with 8 GB of ram. My Excel abilities are lacking, to say the least, so I wasn't able to make meaningful charts from the data. I will work on making parallel efficiency / speedup charts in the future. In the absence of these charts I will explain my results here. 

Basically, increasing chunk size has a varying effect on performance. This is the expected behaviour because if the chunk size is too low, you increase the communication overhead, and if the chunk size is too large, then individual threads have issues finding a chunk of the appropriate size for them to work on. The benchmark I ran found that a chunk size of 20 is approximately the optimal size.

Conclusion
----------
The Ubalanced tree search benchmark is a useful benchmark for analyzing the efficiency of dynamic load balancing. It can help to illustrate the communication overhead associated with a given load balancing scheme, which will become increasingly useful as distributed systems are abstracted from the application programmer.